Agamemnon, howif he had boils?
full, all over, generally?
Thersites!
And those boils did run? say so:did not the general run then?
were not that a botchy core?
Dog!
Then would come some matterfrom him; I see none now.
Thou bitch-wolf's son,canst thou not hear?
Feel, then.
The plague of Greece upon thee,thou mongrel beef-witted lord!
Speak then, thouvinewedst leaven, speak:
I will beat theeinto handsomeness.
I shall sooner rail theeinto wit and holiness:
but, I think, thy horsewill sooner con an oration
than thou learn a prayer withoutbook. Thou canst strike,
canst thou? a red murraino' thy jade's tricks!
Toadstool, learn me theproclamation.
Dost thou think I have nosense, thou strikest me thus?
The proclamation!
Thou art proclaimed afool, I think.
Do not, porpentine, donot: my fingers itch.
I would thou didst itchfrom head to foot
and I had thescratching of thee;
I would make thee theloathsomest scab in Greece.
I say, the proclamation!
Thou grumblest and railestevery hour on Achilles,
and thou art as full of envyat his greatness as Cerberus
is at Proserpine's beauty,
Mistress Thersites!
Thou shouldest strike him.
He would pun thee intoshivers with his fist,
as a sailor breaks a biscuit.
You whoreson cur!
Do, do.
Thou stool for a witch!
Ay, do, do; thousodden-witted lord!
thou hast no more brain thanI have in mine elbows;
thou art here butto thrash Trojans;
and thou art bought and soldamong those of any wit,
like a barbarian slave.
thou thing of no bowels, thou!
You dog!
You scurvy lord!
You cur!
Why, how now, Ajax!wherefore do you thus?
How now, Thersites!what's the matter, man?
You see him there, do you?
Ay; what's the matter?
Nay, look upon him.
So I do: what's thematter?
Nay, but regard him well.
'Well!' why, I do so.
But yet you looknot well upon him;
for whosoever you takehim to be, he is Ajax.
I know that, fool.
Ay, but that fool knowsnot himself.
Therefore I beat thee.
Lo, lo, lo, lo, whatmodicums of wit he utters!
his evasions haveears thus long.
I have bobbed his brain morethan he has beat my bones:
This lord, Ajax, whowears his wit in his belly
and his guts in his head, I'lltell you what I say of him.
What?
I say, this Ajax--
Nay, good Ajax.
Has not so much wit--
Nay, I must hold you.
As will stop the eyeof Helen's needle,
for whom hecomes to fight.
Will thou set thy wit to afool's?
No, I warrant you; for afools will shame it.
Good words, Thersites.
What's the quarrel?
I bade the vile owl go learn methe tenor of the proclamation,
and he rails upon me.
I serve thee not.
Well, go to, go to.
I serve here voluntarily.
Your last servicewas sufferance,
'twas not voluntary: noman is beaten voluntary:
Ajax was here the voluntary,and you as under an impress.
E'en so; a great deal of yourwit, too, lies in your sinews,
or else there be liars.Hector have a great catch,
if he knock out eitherof your brains:
a' were as good crack afusty nut with no kernel.
What, with me too,Thersites?
There's Ulysses and oldNestor, whose wit was mouldy
ere your grandsires hadnails on their toes,
yoke you like draught-oxen andmake you plough up the wars.
What, what?
Yes, good sooth:
I shall cut out yourtongue.
'Tis no matter! I shall speakas much as thou afterwards.
No more words, Thersites;peace!
I will hold my peace
when Achilles' brachbids me, shall I?
There's for you, Patroclus.
I will see you hanged,like clotpoles,
ere I come any moreto your tents:
I will keep wherethere is wit stirring
and leave thefaction of fools.
A good riddance.
Marry, this, sir, is proclaim'dthrough all our host:
That Hector, by the fifthhour of the sun,
Will with a trumpet callsome knight to arms
That hath a stomach;
and such a one thatdare Maintain
--I know not what:'tis trash. Farewell.
Farewell. Who shall answerhim?
I know not: 'tis put tolottery; otherwise
He knew his man.
O, meaning you. I will golearn more of it.
After so many hours,lives, speeches spent,
Thus once again saysNestor from the Greeks:
'Deliver Helen, and alldamage else--
As honour, loss of time,travail, expense,
Wounds, friends, and whatelse dear that is consumed
In hot digestion of thiscormorant war--
Shall be struck off.'Hector, what say you to't?
Though no man lesser fearsthe Greeks than I
As far as toucheth myparticular,
Yet, dread Priam,
There is no lady of moresofter bowels,
More spongy to suck in thesense of fear,
More ready to cry out 'Whoknows what follows?'
Than Hector is: the woundof peace is surety,
Surety secure; but modestdoubt is call'd
The beacon of the wise,the tent that searches
To the bottom of theworst. Let Helen go:
Since the first sword wasdrawn about this question,
Every tithe soul, 'mongstmany thousand dismes,
Hath been as dear asHelen; I mean, of ours:
If we have lost so manytenths of ours,
To guard a thing not oursnor worth to us,
Had it our name, the valueof one ten,
What merit's in thatreason which denies
The yielding of her up?
Fie, fie, my brother!
Weigh you the worth andhonour of a king
So great as our dreadfather in a scale
Of common ounces? will youwith counters sum
The past proportion of hisinfinite?
And buckle in a scale mostfathomless
With spans and inches sodiminutive
As fears and reasons?
If we talk of reason, Let'sshut our gates and sleep:
manhood and honour Shouldhave hare-hearts,
would they but fattheir thoughts
With this cramm'dreason:
reason and respect Make liverspale and lustihood deject.
Brother, she is not worth whatshe doth cost The keeping.
What is aught, but as 'tisvalued?
But value dwells not inparticular will;
It holds his estimate anddignity
As well wherein 'tisprecious of itself
As in the prizer: 'tis madidolatry
To make the servicegreater than the god
And the will dotes that isattributive
To what infectiouslyitself affects,
Without some image of theaffected merit.
I take to-day a wife, andmy election
Is led on in the conductof my will;
My will enkindled by mineeyes and ears,
Two traded pilots 'twixtthe dangerous shores
Of will and judgment: howmay I avoid,
Although my will distastewhat it elected,
The wife I chose? therecan be no evasion
To blench from this and tostand firm by honour:
We turn not back the silksupon the merchant,
When we have soil'd them,nor the remainder viands
We do not throw inunrespective sieve,
Because we now are full.It was thought meet
Paris should do somevengeance on the Greeks:
Your breath of fullconsent bellied his sails;
The seas and winds, oldwranglers, took a truce
And did him service: hetouch'd the ports desired,
And for an old aunt whomthe Greeks held captive,
He brought a Grecian queen,whose youth and freshness
Wrinkles Apollo's, andmakes stale the morning.
Why keep we her? theGrecians keep our aunt:
Is she worth keeping? why,she is a pearl,
Whose price hath launch'dabove a thousand ships,
And turn'd crown'd kingsto merchants.
If you'll avouch 'twaswisdom Paris went--
As you must needs, for youall cried 'Go, go,'--
If you'll confess hebrought home worthy prize--
As you must needs, for youall clapp'd your hands
And cried 'Inestimable!'--whydo you now
The issue of your properwisdoms rate,
And do a deed that fortunenever did,
Beggar the estimationwhich you prized
Richer than sea and land?O, theft most base,
That we have stol'n whatwe do fear to keep!
Cry, Trojans, cry!
What noise? what shriek isthis?
Cry, Trojans!
Cry, Trojans, cry! lend meten thousand eyes,
And I will fill them withprophetic tears.
Peace, sister, Peace!!
Virgins and boys, mid-ageand wrinkled eld,
Soft infancy, that nothingcanst but cry,
Add to my clamours! let uspay betimes
A moiety of that mass ofmoan to come.
Cry, Trojans, cry! practiseyour eyes with tears!
Troy must not be, norgoodly Ilion stand;
Our firebrand brother,Paris, burns us all.
Cry, Trojans, cry! a Helenand a woe:
Cry, cry! Troy burns, orelse let Helen go.
Now, youthful Troilus, donot these high strains
Of divination in oursister work
Some touches of remorse?or is your blood
So madly hot that nodiscourse of reason,
Nor fear of bad success ina bad cause,
Can qualify the same?
Why, brother Hector,
We may not think thejustness of each act
Such and no other thanevent doth form it,
Nor once deject thecourage of our minds,
Because Cassandra's mad:her brain-sick raptures
Cannot distaste thegoodness of a quarrel
Which hath our severalhonours all engaged
To make it gracious. Formy private part,
I am no more touch'd thanall Priam's sons:
And Jove forbid thereshould be done amongst us
Such things as mightoffend the weakest spleen
To fight for and maintain!
Else might the worldconvince of levity
As well my undertakings asyour counsels:
But I attest the gods,your full consent
Gave wings to mypropension and cut off
All fears attending on sodire a project.
For what, alas, can thesemy single arms?
What Propugnation is inone man's valour,
To stand the push andenmity of those
This quarrel would excite?Yet, I protest,
Were I alone to pass thedifficulties
And had as ample power asI have will,
Paris should ne'er retractwhat he hath done,
Nor faint in the pursuit.
Paris, you speakLike one besotted
on your sweet delights:
You have the honey still,but these the gall;
So to be valiant is nopraise at all.
Sir, I propose not merelyto myself
The pleasures such abeauty brings with it;
But I would have the soilof her fair rape
Wiped off, in honourablekeeping her.
What treason were it tothe ransack'd queen,
Disgrace to your greatworths and shame to me,
Now to deliver herpossession up
On terms of base compulsion!
Can it be That so degeneratea strain as this
Should once set footing inyour generous bosoms?
There's not the meanestspirit on our party
Without a heart to dare orsword to draw
When Helen is defended,nor none so noble
Whose life were illbestow'd or death unfamed
Where Helen is thesubject; then, I say,
Well may we fight for herwhom, we know well,
The world's large spacescannot parallel.
Paris and Troilus, youhave both said well,
And on the cause andquestion now in hand
Have glozed, but superficially:
not much Unlike young men,whom Aristotle thought
Unfit to hear moralphilosophy:
The reasons you allege domore conduce
To the hot passion ofdistemper'd blood
Than to make up a freedetermination
'Twixt right and wrong,for pleasure and revenge
Have ears more deaf thanadders to the voice
Of any true decision.Nature craves
All dues be render'd totheir owners: now,
What nearer debt in allhumanity
Than wife is to thehusband? If this law
Of nature be corruptedthrough affection,
And that great minds, ofpartial indulgence
To their benumbed wills,resist the same,
There is a law in eachwell-order'd nation
To curb those ragingappetites which are
Most disobedient andrefractory.
If Helen then be wife toSparta's king,
As it is known she is,these moral laws
Of nature and of nationsspeak aloud
To have her back return'd:thus to persist
In doing wrong extenuatesnot wrong,
But makes it much more heavy.
Hector's opinion Isthis in way of truth;
yet ne'ertheless, My spritelybrethren, I propend to you
In resolution to keepHelen still,
For 'tis a cause that hathno mean dependance
Upon our joint and severaldignities.
Why, there you touch'd thelife of our design:
Were it not glory that wemore affected
Than the performance ofour heaving spleens,
I would not wish a drop ofTrojan blood
Spent more in her defence.But, worthy Hector,
She is a theme of honourand renown,
A spur to valiant andmagnanimous deeds,
Whose present courage maybeat down our foes,
And fame in time to comecanonize us;
For, I presume, braveHector would not lose
So rich advantage of apromised glory
As smiles upon theforehead of this action
For the wide world'srevenue.
I am yours,
You valiant offspring ofgreat Priamus.
I have a roistingchallenge sent amongst
The dun and factiousnobles of the Greeks
Will strike amazement totheir drowsy spirits:
I was advertised theirgreat general slept,
Whilst emulation in thearmy crept:
This, I presume, will wakehim.
How now, Thersites! what lostin the labyrinth of thy fury!
Shall the elephantAjax carry it thus?
He beats me, and I rail athim: O, worthy satisfaction!
would it were otherwise;that I could beat him,
whilst he railed at me.'Sfoot, I'll learn to conjure
and raise devils, butI'll see some issue
of my spiteful execrations.Then there's Achilles,
a rare enginer! IfTroy be not taken
till these two undermine it,
the walls will stand tillthey fall of themselves.
O thou great thunder-darterof Olympus,
forget that thou art Jove, theking of gods and, Mercury,
lose all the serpentinecraft of thy caduceus,
if ye take not that little,little less than little wit
from them that they have!
which short-armedignorance itself
knows is so abundant scarce,
it will not in circumventiondeliver a fly from a spider,
without drawingtheir massy irons
and cutting the web.
After this, the vengeanceon the whole camp!
or rather, theneopolitan bone-ache!
for that, methinks, isthe curse dependent
on those that warfor a placket.
I have said my prayersand devil Envy say Amen.
What ho! my Lord Achilles!
Who's there? Thersites! GoodThersites, come in and rail.
If I could have remembereda gilt counterfeit,
thou wouldst not have slippedout of my contemplation:
but it is no matter;thyself upon thyself!
The common curse of mankind,folly and ignorance,
be thine in great revenue!
Let thy blood be thydirection till thy death!
Where's Achilles?
What, art thou devout?wast thou in prayer?
Ay: the heavens hear me!
Amen.
Who's there?
Thersites, my lord.
Where, where? Art thou come?why, my cheese, my digestion,
why hast thou not served thyselfin to my table so many meals?
Come, what's Agamemnon?
Thy commander, Achilles.Then tell me, Patroclus,
what's Achilles?
Thy lord, Thersites: thentell me, I pray thee,
what's Thersites?
Thy knower, Patroclus:then tell me, Patroclus,
what art thou?
Thou mayst tell thatknowest.
O, tell, tell.
I'll decline the whole question.Agamemnon commands Achilles;
Achilles is my lord; Iam Patroclus' knower,
and Patroclus is a fool.
You rascal!
Peace, fool! I have notdone.
He is a privileged man.Proceed, Thersites.
Agamemnon is a fool;Achilles is a fool;
Thersites is a fool, and, asaforesaid, Patroclus is a fool.
Derive this; come.
Agamemnon is a fool tooffer to command Achilles;
Achilles is a fool to becommanded of Agamemnon;
Thersites is a fool toserve such a fool,
and Patroclus isa fool positive.
Why am I a fool?
Make that demand of the creater.It suffices me thou art.
Look you, who comes here?
Patroclus, I'll speak withnobody.
Come in with me,Thersites.
Here is such patchery, suchjuggling and such knavery!
all the argument is a whore anda cuckold;
a good quarrel to drawemulous factions
and bleed to death upon.
Now, and war andlechery confound all!
Where is Achilles?
Within his tent; but illdisposed, my lord.
Let it be known to himthat we are here.
He shent our messengers;and we lay by
Our appertainments,visiting of him:
Let him be told so; lestperchance he think
We dare not move thequestion of our place,
Or know not what we are.
I shall say so to him.
We saw him at the openingof his tent:
He is not sick.
Yes, lion-sick, sick ofproud heart: you may call it
melancholy, if you will favourthe man; but, by my head,
'tis pride: but why, why?let him show us the cause.
A word, my lord.
What moves Ajax thus tobay at him?
Achilles hath inveigledhis fool from him.
Who, Thersites?
He.
Then will Ajax lack matter,if he have lost his argument.
No, you see, heis his argument
that has hisargument, Achilles.
All the better; theirfraction is more our wish
than their faction:
but it was a strong composurea fool could disunite.
The amity that wisdom knitsnot, folly may easily untie.
Here comes Patroclus.
No Achilles with him.
The elephant hath joints,but none for courtesy:
his legs are legs fornecessity, not for flexure.
Achilles bids me say, heis much sorry,
If any thing more thanyour sport and pleasure
Did move your greatnessand this noble state
To call upon him; he hopesit is no other
But for your health andyour digestion sake,
And after-dinner's breath.
Hear you, Patroclus:
We are too well acquaintedwith these answers:
But his evasion, wing'dthus swift with scorn,
Cannot outfly ourapprehensions.
Much attribute he hath,and much the reason
Why we ascribe it to him;yet all his virtues,
Not virtuously on his ownpart beheld,
Do in our eyes begin tolose their gloss,
Yea, like fair fruit in anunwholesome dish,
Are like to rot untasted.Go and tell him,
We come to speak with him;and you shall not sin,
If you do say we think himover-proud
And under-honest, inself-assumption greater
Than in the note of judgment;
and worthier than himself
Here tend the savagestrangeness he puts on,
Disguise the holy strengthof their command,
And underwrite in anobserving kind
His humorous predominance;yea, watch
His pettish lunes,his ebbs, his flows,
as if The passage and wholecarriage of this action
Rode on his tide. Go tellhim this, and add,
That if he overhold hisprice so much,
We'll none of him; but lethim, like an engine
Not portable, lie underthis report:
'Bring action hither, thiscannot go to war:
A stirring dwarf we doallowance give
Before a sleeping giant.'Tell him so.
I shall; and bring hisanswer presently.
In second voice we'll notbe satisfied;
We come to speak with him.Ulysses, enter you.
What is he more thananother?
No more than what hethinks he is.
Is he so much?
Do you not think he thinkshimself a better man than I am?
No question.
Will you subscribe histhought, and say he is?
No, noble Ajax; you areas strong, as valiant,
as wise, no less noble,much more gentle,
and altogether more tractable.
Why should a man be proud?How doth pride grow?
I know not what pride is.
Your mind is the fairer, Ajax,
and your virtues the clearer.
He that is proudeats up himself:
pride is his own glass, his owntrumpet, his own chronicle;
and whatever praisesitself but in the deed,
devours the deed in the praise.
I do hate a proud man, as Ihate the engendering of toads.
Yet he loves himself: is'tnot strange?
Achilles will not to thefield to-morrow.
What's his excuse?
He doth rely on none,
But carries on the streamof his dispose
Without observance orrespect of any,
In will peculiar and inself-admission.
Why will he not upon ourfair request
Untent his person andshare the air with us?
Things small as nothing,for request's sake only,
He makes important: possess'dhe is with greatness,
And speaks not to himselfbut with a pride
That quarrels atself-breath: imagined worth
Holds in his blood suchswoln and hot discourse
That 'twixt his mental andhis active parts
Kingdom'd Achilles incommotion rages
And batters down himself:what should I say?
He is so plaguy proud thatthe death-tokens of it
Cry 'No recovery.'
Let Ajax go to him.
Dear lord, go you andgreet him in his tent:
'Tis said he holds you well,and will be led
At your request a littlefrom himself.
O Agamemnon, let it not beso!
We'll consecrate the stepsthat Ajax makes
When they go from Achilles:shall the proud lord
That bastes his arrogancewith his own seam
And never suffers matterof the world
Enter his thoughts, savesuch as do revolve
And ruminate himself,shall he be worshipp'd
Of that we hold an idolmore than he?
No, this thrice worthy andright valiant lord
Must not so stale hispalm, nobly acquired;
Nor, by my will,assubjugate his merit,
As amply titled asAchilles is,
By going to Achilles:
That were to enlard hisfat already pride
And add more coals toCancer when he burns
With entertaining greatHyperion.
This lord go to him!Jupiter forbid,
And say in thunder'Achilles go to him.'
O, this is well; herubs the vein of him.
And how his silencedrinks up this applause!
If I go to him,with my armed fist
I'll pash him o'erthe face.
O, no, you shall not go.
An a' be proud with me,I'll pheeze his pride:
Let me go to him.
Not for the worth thathangs upon our quarrel.
A paltry, insolent fellow!
How he describes himself!
Can he not be sociable?
The raven chidesblackness.
I'll let his humoursblood.
He will be the physicianthat should be the patient.
An all men were o' mymind,--
Wit would be out offashion.
A' should not bear it so,a' should eat swords first:
shall pride carry it?
An 'twould, you'ld carryhalf.
A' would have ten shares.
I will knead him; I'llmake him supple.
He's not yet through warm:force him with praises:
pour in, pour in; hisambition is dry.
My lord, you feed too muchon this dislike.
Our noble general, do notdo so.
You must prepare to fightwithout Achilles.
Why, 'tis this naming ofhim does him harm.
Here is a lord--but 'tisbefore his face;
I will be silent.
Wherefore should you so?
He is not emulous, asAchilles is.
Know the whole world, heis as valiant.
A whoreson dog, that shallpelter thus with us!
Would he were a Trojan!
What a vice were it inAjax now,--
If he were proud,--
Or covetous of praise,--
Ay, or surly borne,--
Or strange, orself-affected!
Thank the heavens, lord,thou art of sweet composure;
Praise him that got thee,she that gave thee suck:
Famed be thy tutor, andthy parts of nature
Thrice famed, beyond allerudition:
But he that disciplinedthy arms to fight,
Let Mars divide eternityin twain,
And give him half: and,for thy vigour,
Bull-bearing Milo hisaddition yield
To sinewy Ajax. I will notpraise thy wisdom,
Which, like a bourn, apale, a shore, confines
Thy spacious and dilatedparts: here's Nestor;
Instructed by theantiquary times,
He must, he is, he cannotbut be wise:
Put pardon, father Nestor,were your days
As green as Ajax' and yourbrain so temper'd,
You should not have theeminence of him,
But be as Ajax.
Shall I call you father?
Ay, my good son.
Be ruled by him, LordAjax.
There is no tarrying here;the hart Achilles
Keeps thicket. Please itour great general
To call together all hisstate of war;
Fresh kings are come toTroy: to-morrow
We must with all our mainof power stand fast:
And here's a lord,--comeknights from east to west,
And cull their flower,Ajax shall cope the best.
Go we to council. LetAchilles sleep:
Light boats sail swift, thoughgreater hulks draw deep.